# Recognizers

Parglare uses scannerless parsing. Actually, scanner is integrated in the
parser. Each token is created/recognized in the input during parsing using so
called _recognizer_ which is connected to the grammar terminal symbol.

This gives a great flexibility to the parglare.

First, recognizing tokens during parsing eliminate lexical ambiguities that
arise in separate scanning due to the lack of parsing context.

Second, having a separate recognizers for grammar terminal symbols allows us to
parse not only text but a stream of anything as parsing is nothing more by
constructing a tree (or some other form) out of a flat list of objects. Those
objects are characters if text is parsed, but don't have to be.

Parglare has two built-in recognizers for textual parsing that can be specified
in [the grammar directly](./grammar_language.md#string-recognizer). Those are
usually enough if text is parsed, but if non-textual content is parsed you will
have to supply your own recognizers that are able to recognize tokens in the
input stream of objects.

Recognizers are Python callables of the following form:

    def some_recognizer(input, pos):
       ...
       ...
       return part of input starting at pos


For example if we have an input stream of objects that are comparable (e.g.
numbers) and we want to recognize the ascending elements starting at the given
position but such that the recognized token must have at least two object from
the input. We could write following:

    def ascending_nosingle(input, pos):
        "Match sublist of ascending elements. Matches at least two."
        last = pos + 1
        while last < len(input) and input[last] > input[last-1]:
            last += 1
        if last - pos >= 2:
            return input[pos:last]

We register our recognizers during grammar contstruction. All references in the
grammar rules that don't exists in the grammar (i.e. they are not the rule
themself) must be resolved as recognizers or the exception will be thrown during
grammar construction.

In order to do that, create a Python dict where the key will be a rule name used
in the grammar references and the value will be recognizer callable.


    recognizers = {
       'ascending': ascending_nosingle
    }

    grammar = Grammar.from_file('mygrammar.pg', recognizers=recognizers)


Now, in the grammar in file `mygrammar.pg` you can reference terminal rule
`ascending` (see the key in `recognizers` dict) although it is not defined in
the grammar itself. This terminal rule will match ascending sublist of objects
from the input.

!!! note

    If you want more information you could investigate
    [test_recognizers.py](https://github.com/igordejanovic/parglare/blob/master/tests/func/test_recognizers.py) test.
