.bumpversion.cfg
.cookiecutterrc
.coveragerc
.editorconfig
.pylintrc
.travis.yml
AUTHORS.rst
CHANGELOG.rst
CONTRIBUTING.rst
LICENSE
MANIFEST.in
README.rst
appveyor.yml
setup.cfg
setup.py
tox.ini
ci/appveyor-bootstrap.ps1
ci/appveyor-download.py
ci/appveyor-with-compiler.cmd
ci/bootstrap.py
ci/templates/.travis.yml
ci/templates/appveyor.yml
ci/templates/tox.ini
docs/authors.rst
docs/changelog.rst
docs/conf.py
docs/contributing.rst
docs/docutils.conf
docs/favicon.ico
docs/index.rst
docs/installation.rst
docs/logo.png
docs/quickstart.ipynb
docs/readme.rst
docs/requirements.txt
docs/spelling_wordlist.txt
docs/.ipynb_checkpoints/quickstart-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/__init__.py
docs/examples/characterisation.ipynb
docs/examples/database.ipynb
docs/examples/index.rst
docs/examples/parsing.ipynb
docs/examples/plotting.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/characterisation-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/database-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/examples_characterisation-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/examples_database-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/examples_parsing-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/examples_plotting-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/parsing-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/.ipynb_checkpoints/plotting-checkpoint.ipynb
docs/examples/data/calorimetry/data.csv
docs/examples/data/calorimetry/header.csv
docs/examples/data/characterisation/MCM-41 N2 77.355.json
docs/examples/data/characterisation/NaY N2 77.355.json
docs/examples/data/characterisation/SiO2 N2 77.355.json
docs/examples/data/characterisation/Takeda 5A N2 77.355.json
docs/examples/data/characterisation/UiO-66(Zr) N2 77.355.json
docs/examples/data/database/Carbon X1.json
docs/examples/data/isotherms_json/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - C2H6.json
docs/examples/data/isotherms_json/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - CH4.json
docs/examples/data/isotherms_json/Takeda 5A Phil Billes.json
docs/examples/data/parsing/HKUST-1(Cu) - Calorimetry - CO2.xlsx
docs/examples/data/parsing/MCM-41 N2 phys.xlsx
docs/figures/db_schema.png
docs/figures/svp_graph.png
docs/figures/vle_graph.png
docs/files/carbon_x1_n2.json
docs/files/isotherm.csv
docs/files/isotherm.json
docs/files/isotherm.xlsx
docs/manual/adsorbate.rst
docs/manual/characterisation.rst
docs/manual/dataparsing.rst
docs/manual/eqstate.rst
docs/manual/graphing.rst
docs/manual/iast.rst
docs/manual/index.rst
docs/manual/isotherm.rst
docs/manual/modelling.rst
docs/manual/sample.rst
docs/manual/sqlitedb.rst
docs/manual/units.rst
docs/reference/calculations.rst
docs/reference/classes.rst
docs/reference/index.rst
docs/reference/interfaces.rst
docs/reference/plotting.rst
docs/reference/utilities.rst
src/pygaps/__init__.py
src/pygaps/api.py
src/pygaps/data.py
src/pygaps.egg-info/PKG-INFO
src/pygaps.egg-info/SOURCES.txt
src/pygaps.egg-info/dependency_links.txt
src/pygaps.egg-info/not-zip-safe
src/pygaps.egg-info/requires.txt
src/pygaps.egg-info/top_level.txt
src/pygaps/calculations/__init__.py
src/pygaps/calculations/adsorbent_models.py
src/pygaps/calculations/alphas.py
src/pygaps/calculations/bet.py
src/pygaps/calculations/iast.py
src/pygaps/calculations/initial_enthalpy.py
src/pygaps/calculations/initial_henry.py
src/pygaps/calculations/isosteric_heat.py
src/pygaps/calculations/isotherm_models.py
src/pygaps/calculations/kelvin_models.py
src/pygaps/calculations/langmuir.py
src/pygaps/calculations/psd.py
src/pygaps/calculations/psd_dft.py
src/pygaps/calculations/psd_mesoporous.py
src/pygaps/calculations/psd_microporous.py
src/pygaps/calculations/thickness_models.py
src/pygaps/calculations/tplot.py
src/pygaps/calculations/kernels/dft - N2 - carbon.csv
src/pygaps/classes/__init__.py
src/pygaps/classes/adsorbate.py
src/pygaps/classes/isotherm.py
src/pygaps/classes/modelisotherm.py
src/pygaps/classes/pointisotherm.py
src/pygaps/classes/sample.py
src/pygaps/database/local.db
src/pygaps/graphing/__init__.py
src/pygaps/graphing/calcgraph.py
src/pygaps/graphing/iastgraphs.py
src/pygaps/graphing/isothermgraphs.py
src/pygaps/parsing/__init__.py
src/pygaps/parsing/csvinterface.py
src/pygaps/parsing/excelinterface.py
src/pygaps/parsing/jsoninterface.py
src/pygaps/parsing/sqliteinterface.py
src/pygaps/utilities/__init__.py
src/pygaps/utilities/coolprop_utilities.py
src/pygaps/utilities/exceptions.py
src/pygaps/utilities/folder_utilities.py
src/pygaps/utilities/isotherm_interpolator.py
src/pygaps/utilities/math_utilities.py
src/pygaps/utilities/sqlite_db_creator.py
src/pygaps/utilities/sqlite_db_pragmas.py
src/pygaps/utilities/sqlite_utilities.py
src/pygaps/utilities/string_utilities.py
src/pygaps/utilities/unit_converter.py
tests/__init__.py
tests/conftest.py
tests/test_basic.py
tests/calculations/__init__.py
tests/calculations/conftest.py
tests/calculations/test_alpha_s.py
tests/calculations/test_bet.py
tests/calculations/test_iast.py
tests/calculations/test_isosteric_heat.py
tests/calculations/test_kelvin_models.py
tests/calculations/test_psd.py
tests/calculations/test_t_plot.py
tests/calculations/test_thickness_models.py
tests/calculations/data/calorimetry/data.csv
tests/calculations/data/calorimetry/header.csv
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 298.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 323.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 348.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/HKUST-1(Cu) - Calorimetry - CO2.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/MCM-41 N2 phys.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - C2H6.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - CH4.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/NaY N2 phys.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/SiO2 N2 phys.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/Takeda 5A - Calorimetry - CO2.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/Takeda 5A N2 phys.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms/UiO-66(Zr) N2 phys.xlsx
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 298.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 323.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/BAX 1500 - Isosteric Heat - 348.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/HKUST-1(Cu) KRICT.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/MCM-41 N2 77.355.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - C2H6.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/MOF-5(Zn) - IAST - CH4.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/NaY N2 77.355.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/SiO2 N2 77.355.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/Takeda 5A N2 77.355.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/Takeda 5A Phil Billes.json
tests/calculations/data/isotherms_json/UiO-66(Zr) N2 77.355.json
tests/classes/__init__.py
tests/classes/test_adsorbate.py
tests/classes/test_isotherm.py
tests/classes/test_modelisotherm.py
tests/classes/test_pointisotherm.py
tests/classes/test_sample.py
tests/graphing/__init__.py
tests/graphing/test_calc_graphs.py
tests/graphing/test_iast_graphs.py
tests/graphing/test_iso_graphs.py
tests/parsing/__init__.py
tests/parsing/test_csv.py
tests/parsing/test_excel.py
tests/parsing/test_json.py
tests/parsing/test_sqlite_db.py
tests/utilities/__init__.py
tests/utilities/test_sqlite_utilities.py
tests/utilities/test_utilities.py
tests/utilities/tst/1.tst
tests/utilities/tst/2.tst